imagine you're driving on a long stretch
of highway when uh oh you run out of gas
well you'd probably just call a friend
or triple-a no big deal really now
imagine that same scenario only you're a
pilot flying a commercial jet full of
people that's exactly what happened to a
Canadian plane at a height of 41,000
feet on July 23rd 1983 Air Canada 143
was supposed to be on a routine flight
first the plane was going to make a
short trip from Montreal to Ottawa but
that's when the first issue popped up
the plane seemed to be having problems
with the computer that manages fuel
loading since it wasn't working properly
the ground maintenance crew just
calculated the necessary amount of fuel
on their own after that the flight crew
checked these calculations three times
and everything seemed correct
the plane reached Ottawa without any
other complications and had to depart
for the second trip of the day this time
the distance was much longer since they
were heading for Edmonton about 1700 and
40 miles away
captain Robert Pearson was already
sensing that something was off
he asked the maintenance crew to check
the fuel calculations once again they
did and everything was cool the plane
had about three thousand and 20 gallons
of fuel captain Pearson and his copilot
Maurice quintal concluded that the plane
had roughly 45,000 pounds of fuel which
was more than enough to reach their
destination if they actually had that
much in truth they only had about half
of that just 20,000 160 pounds I know
what you're thinking how could such a
huge mistake go unnoticed well both the
ground crew in Montreal and the flight
crew had forgotten the fact that at the
time Canada was switching from the
imperial system of measurement to metric
that's why all of our Canada's new
planes including the one captain Pearson
was flying were calibrated in metric
units as for the older planes they were
still using imperial unfortunately this
led to a major blunder when the fuel was
calculated in pounds instead of kilos
remember a kilogram is only about half a
pound that's why they really had half
the amount of the fuel they needed to
make the trip
the plane was at a height of 41,000 feet
when the first warning light flared up
the crew figured that the fuel pump in
the left wing had failed so they
switched it off and it really isn't that
big a deal if one fuel pump goes out a
plane can still fly however a few
minutes later the second light came on
the crew knew it had to be something
more serious than a coincidence at that
moment the plane was only halfway to
Edmonton
that's when captain Pearson decided to
change course and instead head to
Winnipeg for an emergency landing not
long after that the left engine stopped
working entirely then the alarm went off
indicating a complete loss of both
engines the plane had run out of fuel
despite their years and years of flight
experience neither Robert Pearson Norma
Rees quintal had ever heard this scary
sound before the pilots desperately
searched through their manuals to figure
out how to deal with such an emergency
unfortunately there were no instructions
on what to do with both engines are out
plus an aircraft means its engine power
to control all the systems so the crew
is literally piloting a huge debt with
no electricity hydraulics or power
what's worse the pilots couldn't use the
instruments they needed on top of that
air traffic control couldn't guide the
plane because its radar responder which
is typically powered by the engines
wasn't working either
that meant that Winnipeg ATC had to use
a good old-fashioned ruler they placed
it on the radar to figure out the
distance the plane had traveled they
then use this number to calculate the
rate of the plane's descent this would
tell them about how much further the
plane could travel the only way out was
to glide the aircraft and hope it had
managed to land safely luckily for the
passengers and crew captain Pearson was
a highly experienced glider pilot but
still he never tried to glide a Boeing
767 with all systems down before but the
most serious problem was the loss of
hydraulic pressure the thing is that a
Boeing 767 has what's called a ram air
turbine that means the faster the plane
goes the faster the turbine spins and
the better the hydraulic pump works when
a plane slows down for landing the
turbine stops spinning so
fast that there's a drop in hydraulic
pressure in short a pilot's ability to
control the aircraft increases along
with a drop in hydraulic pressure anyway
after most of the plane systems had shut
down it started to lose altitude at a
speed of 2,000 feet a minute
after making some calculations both the
pilots and the air traffic controllers
came to the conclusion that the plane
didn't have any chances of making it to
Winnipeg that's when they finally had
some good luck
Maurice Quint all thought of the nearby
Royal Canadian Air Force Base just 12
miles away in the town of Gimli even
better it was no longer in use Quintel
knew the airspace and landing strips in
the area from his time in the service
so everyone agreed that landing at the
abandoned military base was the only
possible solution however when the plane
was nearing the runway
the pilots realized they were still too
high so they decided to try what's
called a forward slip the risky part is
that while this maneuvering technique
can be done in small personal airplanes
commercial aircraft aren't designed to
perform it plus the plane was descending
too fast for the maneuver to have any
chance of success but they had no other
option besides the captain had tons of
experience performing a forward slip so
the plane was in good hands oh but our
story doesn't end there you see the
pilots still weren't aware of the most
terrifying thing about this situation
that abandoned military base wasn't just
sitting there empty and derelict it had
been converted into a Motorsports Park
in racetrack so that same day July 23rd
1983 it was full of happy park goers
campers and vehicles
Maurice Quinto didn't notice the people
on the runway until it was too late to
divert the plane as for captain Pearson
he was oblivious to the danger because
all of his focus was on the speedometer
the aircraft had gotten incredibly
difficult to control
thanks to those fancy hydraulic turbines
I told you about earlier
remember they dropped the hydraulic
pressure when the plane slows down to
land the people on the runway didn't
expect to see a gigantic plane
approaching them at high speed and how
could they all the engines were down
this thing was gliding in silence but
don't worry they saw it coming and got
out of the way in time
once it had touched the ground captain
Pearson immediately hit the brakes that
means the weight of the plane shifted
forward and this in turn sent the front
landing wheels back up into the
aircraft's body but it's okay
losing the front wheels was actually a
good thing because it allowed more
friction to build up between the plane
and the runway meaning it had come to a
halt much earlier thus in the end the
Boeing 767 managed to stop just 100 feet
away from spectators and believe it or
not not a single passenger crew member
or Park goer was seriously hurt
whew the whole incident was dubbed the
Gimli glider and after receiving some
heat from the airline for that initial
fuel miscalculation both pilots ended up
receiving the diploma for outstanding
airmanship in 1985 and arrestingly
enough other pilots have tried to land a
plane under the same circumstances in a
simulator yet all their attempts led to
crashes maurice quintal got a promotion
and became a captain in 1989 and Robert
Pearson flew with Air Canada for 10 more
years before transferring to another
airline the most interesting thing
though is that after it was repaired the
famous Boeing 767 kept flying long after
the accident 25 more years to be exact
it made its last flight on January 1
2008 and then headed to the Mojave
Desert for its retirement just a few
weeks later oh and captain's Robert
Pearson and Maurice Quint all were on
board the plane during its final journey
and three of the six flight attendants
who'd been on flight 143
also bid farewell to the plane ah now
that's really touching don't you think
so do you have any fears connected with
airplanes I just don't like the ones
with snakes on them but let me know your
thoughts down in the comments remember
to give this video a like share it with
your friends and click subscribe to stay
on the bright side of life
[Music]